The modern human experience places a large emphasis upon the material world. From the
day of our birth to the day we die, we are frequently preoccupied with the world around
us. Whether struggling to feed ourselves, occupying ourselves with modern inventions,
interacting with other people or animals, or simply meditating on the air we breathe, our
attention is focused on different aspects of the material world. In fact only a handful of
disciplines—certain subsets of religion, philosophy, and abstract math—can be considered
completely unrelated to the material world. Everything else is somehow related to chemistry,
the scientific discipline which studies the properties, composition, and transformation of
matter.
Chemistry itself has a number of branches:
• Analytical chemistry seeks to determine the composition of substances.
• Biochemistry is the study of chemicals found in living things (such as DNA and proteins).
• Inorganic Chemistry studies substances that do not contain carbon.
• Organic chemistry studies carbon-based substances. Carbon, as described in more detail
in this book, has unique properties that allow it to make complex chemicals, including
those of living organisms. An entire field of chemistry is devoted to substances with this
element.
• Physical chemistry is the study of the physical properties of chemicals, 
which are characteristics that can be measured without changing the composition of the substance.

Chemistry as a discipline is based on a number of other fields. Because it is a measurement based science, 
math plays an important role in its study and usage. A proficiency in
high-school level algebra should be all that is needed in this text, and can be obtained from
a number of sources. Chemistry itself is determined by the rules and principles of physics.
Basic principles from physics may be introduced in this text when necessary.

There are many reasons to study chemistry. It is one pillar of the natural sciences necessary
for detailed studies in the physical sciences or engineering. The principles of biology and
psychology are rooted in the biochemistry of the animal world, in ways that are only now
beginning to be understood. Modern medicine is firmly rooted in the chemical nature of
the human body. Even students without long term aspirations in science find beauty in the
infinite possibilities that originate from the small set of rules found in chemistry.

Chemistry has the power to explain everything in this world, from the ordinary to the bizarre.
Why does iron rust? What makes propane such an efficient, clean burning fuel? How can
soot and diamond be so different in appearance, yet so similar chemically? Chemistry has
the answer to these questions, and so many more. Understanding chemistry is the key to
understanding the world as we know it.